---
layout: default
title: K-Lisp Pseudo-Proposal 2022
date: 2023-09-12
tags: [programming]
---

_This is a proposal for a project I wrote sometime in the fall of 2022. I never pursued the project further, but I still think the idea is interesting._

#### Abstract

This is not really a formal proposal, and is not meant to adhere to any academic
standard for formatting, though I did feel something a little formalized would be
most effective at communicating the following ideas. This document serves as a
description of the mathematical language I’ve decided to call K-Lisp, as well as
its potential implementation as a usable (though likely impractical) programming
language.

#### Introduction

I have been fascinated by Lisp dialects for a long time, especially Clojure and
Common Lisp. As a freshman in high school, I wrote an interpreter for a simple
Lisp in C. I also attempted to write a compiler but never finished the project.
That effort led me to some questions that I’ve continued to ponder ever since.

#### Macro programming

One of the hallmarks of Lisp is its hygenic macro system. Macro systems might
be more accurate, since the Scheme standard specifies a rather different syntax
for macros from that of Common Lisp. However, these systems all essentially
find their root in the same idea: they process the program AST as opposed to
dealing in terms of lexical tokens (as is the case with the C preprocessor).
Basically, macros in Lisp are functions that operate on the AST as a data
structure, which is very easy for the language designer to implement and for the
programmer to reason about since Lisp code is just nested lists. This kind of
tree structure is very easy to analyze.

This kind of macro is what makes Lisp so famously extensible. The language
can basically be molded into whatever form is most efficient for the task the
programmer is trying to complete. This is also technically possible with the C
preprocessor, though that system is notoriously primitive, and beyond that it is
generally impossible in high-level programming languages. Java, for example, has
no system for extending the base language. If you wanted to extend Java, you
would have to write a preprocessor for it yourself that you could run programs
through to get compilable code.

#### The generalization

Common Lisp and Clojure, as well as Racket, the most widely used Scheme
implementation, are all compiled languages. This means that macros need to
be dealt with at compile-time, since the AST that they operate on cannot be
preserved effectively in the bytecode emmitted by a compiler.

The big idea of this proposal is an interpreted Lisp that can operate on its
own code at runtime, dynamically examining itself and applying functional
transformations to its own functions as list-like data structures.

At this point, the extensibility wouldn’t even come from macros. It would come
from functions that take other functions as arguments. Now, closures are no new
idea, obviously. However, closures passed as arguments are generally opaque
black-boxes to the functions they’re passed to. Passing functions to functions is a
key part not just of functional programming today, but of programming in general
with systems like JavaScript’s callbacks, and yet in all mainstream languages,
the most that is visible to a caller about a function is its type signature.
In an interpreted Lisp dialect, total code reflection would be pretty much trivial,
leaving only the question of syntax. I suggest that such a language should have
extensive syntactic sugar to make dealing with code as a data structure efficient.
Here is an example of the syntax as I’ve designed it thus far:

(Note that `;*...*;` denotes a multi-line comment)

```
   Listing 1

 1 ;* A function reverse-args, that takes a function f(x, y)
 2  * and returns a function g(x, y) = f(y, x).
 3  *;
 4
 5 ;; The Haskell-style declaration of the function
 6 (:: reverse-args (=> (A B C) (-> (-> A B C) (-> A C B))))
 7
 8 ;; The definition of the function
 9 (def (reverse-args f)
10    (\ (y x) (f x y)))
```

Here you can see the Haskell-inspired style of type declarations, function definitions,
and lambdas (denoted with the backslash on line 10).

This constructs a new function using `f`, as you would in Haskell, but it doesn’t
actually deconstruct `f` in reflective fashion. For that, we need to use pattern
matching. We can pattern match against a function in this system using the
lambda operator from Listing 1.

```
   Listing 2

 1 ;* A function get-constant,
 2  * which extracts the constant term from a single-variable expression.
 3  *;
 4
 5 (:: get-constant (-> (-> rational rational) rational))
 6
 7 (def (get-constant (\ (x) (+ \x $#C)))
 8    $(c)
 9    c)
10
11 (def (get-constant (\ (x) (+ $\x $\x)))
12    $(a b)
13    (+ (get-constant a) (get-constant b)))
15
16 (def (get-constant (\ (x) x)) 0)
```

So, what exactly does this mean?

The first important thing to point out is that the backslash character has two
related but different meanings. `\x`, as a term in an S-expression, means any
expression in which the only variable is the argument `x` from the current context.
In other words, any function of `x` where `x` is a relevant parameter and is not
ignored can be pattern-matched by `(\ (x) \x)`, since that means “a function
of `x` whose value is some expression involving `x`.”

The second thing to point out is the symbol `#C`. This refers to an expression of
constant value, one that involves no variables (meaning function parameters). It
is a special token to be recognized by the compiler.

The third thing to note is that the `$` symbol means that a component of the
pattern is to be bound to a name. On line 7 you can see the pattern `$#C` and then
the binding `$(c)` on line 8. This means that the constant expression matched
by `#C` is to be bound to the name `c`, which is then returned on line 9.

The second and third patterns for get-constant, defined on lines 11 and 16, acknowledge that the expression provided may not be neatly arranged, and may
involve multiple constants across different S-expressions. These constants should
be added together and combined.
Note that if you tried to pass anything other than an expression of the form `(+ x C)`, or a nested expression only comprised of layers of the same form, to the
function as defined above, it would fail to match it and throw a runtime error.
This could be resolved by adding more patterns.

#### Implementation (laziness)

K-Lisp, as a programming language which can be run, could have extensive
laziness because of its pure functionality. I think the interpreter ought only to
evaluate expressions when IO is involved, at least as a proof-of-concept, though
further optimization might be necessary to balance RAM usage.

#### A fuller example

I will conclude this proposal with a semi-comprehensive symbolic derivative
calculator formulated in K-Lisp. It would work for functions of the forms:

```
f(x) = C
f(x) = x
f(x) = g(x) + h(x)
f(x) = g(x) - h(x)
f(x) = -g(x)
f(x) = g(x) * h(x)
f(x) = g(x)/h(x)
f(x) = x^C
f(x) = g(h(x))
```

Here is the code:

```
;; This is a program which defines a function to find the derivatives of other functions.
(:: deriv (-> (-> rational rational) (-> rational rational)))

;; dC/dx = 0
;; Note: #C specifically refers to an expression involving no variables (arguments).
(def (deriv (\ (x) #C)) 0)

;; dx/dx = 1
(def (deriv (\ (x) x)) 1)

;; Addition
(def (deriv (\ (x) (+ $\x $\x)))
   $(g h)
   (\ (x) (+ ((deriv g) x) ((deriv h) x))))

;; Subtraction
(def (deriv (\ (x) (- $\x $\x)))
   $(g h)
   (\ (x) (- ((deriv g) x) ((deriv h) x))))

;; Negation
(def (deriv (\ (x) (neg $\x)))
   $(g)
   (\ (x) (neg ((derive g) x))))

;; Multiplication
(def (deriv (\ (x) (* $\x $\x)))
   $(g h)
   (\ (x) (+ (* ((deriv g) x) (h x))
             (* (g x) ((deriv h) x)))))

;; Division
(def (deriv (\ (x) (/ $\x $\x)))
   $(g h)
   (\ (x) (/ (- (* ((deriv g) x) (h x))
                (* (g x) ((deriv h) x)))
             (** ((deriv h) x) 2))))

;; Power rule
(def (deriv (\ (x) (** x $#C)))
   $(c)
   (* c (** x (- c 1))))

;; Chain rule
(def (deriv (\ (x) $\$\x))
   $(h g)
   (\ (x) (* ((deriv h) (g x)) ((deriv g) x))))

;; Entry point
(def main
   (let (( (f x) (* 2 (** x 2)) ))
      (print ((deriv f) 2))))
```
This should print 8, the derivative of 2x^2 at 2.

Note that all the `deriv` calls implicit in that last line, including `((deriv f) 2)` itself, are only evaluated once the `print` function is called.

